---
output: word_document
bibliography: "/Users/connor/Zotero/My_Library.json"
reference-section-title: References
---

I will have data on the universe of active transportation projects which applied for ATP funding. In addition to the information included in the application packets—the location of the project, the current street conditions, intended changes and attributes of the project, and the estimated budget and timeline—the data include the score assigned to each project, and the current construction status of projects approved for funding, including the date of completion, if completed. While the data include information about project locations, that information is provided as PDF maps, verbal descriptions, and a single latitude/longitude point. In order to match the projects to the outcome data, I will generate shapefiles of polygons denoting the right of way in which the project is being built. These shapefiles are built manually using ArcGIS, using the PDF maps of project locations as well as verbal descriptions of their spatial extent.

Using the ATP projects as the sample does imply some potential sample selection issues which influence the interpretation of the estimated effects. Because this is a sample of projects which localities have actively pursued, the treatment effect might differ from an average treatment effect for a bike lane installed on a randomly chosen street. The localities and streets observed in this dataset might quantitatively differ from a random sample of California streets. Localities which are applying for these funds might already be in the process of gentrifying prior to the construction of the streetscape infrastructure changes, or have other differences from localities which did not apply. While these selection concerns impact the external validity of the results, and how one should interpret the estimated coefficients, it should not lead to bias in the estimates, since identification is from project funding at the score threshold, not whether they submitted an application. 

To estimate the outcomes of these infrastructure projects, I will use several different data sources. The first is data on visitation to business and other points of interest from [SafeGraph](https://safegraph.com/), a data company that aggregates anonymized location data from numerous applications in order to provide insights about physical places, via the SafeGraph Community. To enhance privacy, SafeGraph excludes census block group information if fewer than five devices visited an establishment in a month from a given census block group. SafeGraph define points of interest (POI), which are specific physical locations that a person might find interesting. POIs can be any physical place humans can visit except single-family homes. SafeGraph categorizes these POIs using the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) developed by the US Census Bureau to identify different types and purposes of places. The SafeGraph data provide weekly and monthly counts of visitors to points of interest which I can match to the locations of proposed streetscape projects. The counts are based on a sample of mobile phone users, and thus are normalized and weighted to reflect the population as a whole [@safegraph2022]. 

For traffic outcomes, I will use data from [Streetlight Data](https://www.streetlightdata.com). Their data provide traffic speeds and throughput on specified road segments by day of month or hour of day, averaged monthly or annually. Traffic crash and fatality data will be from the Transportation Injury Mapping System (TIMS) [@TIMS2022], which sources its data from California's [Statewide Integrated Traffic Records System (SWITRS)](https://www.chp.ca.gov/programs-services/services-information/switrs-internet-statewide-integrated-traffic-records-system). SWITRS records all crashes reported to the California Highway Patrol, including those reported by local agencies and city police departments. It contains geocoded data mapping all reported crashes in California, including the location, time, involved vehicles, severity, and the number of people injured or killed. 

Estimating unbiased causal impacts of streetscape infrastructure changes is challenging because these expensive infrastructure projects are rarely assigned in a plausibly random manner to streets. Cities are highly selective about which streets receive which changes based on both observable and unobservable (to the researcher) features. To overcome these selection effects, I implement a regression discontinuity (RD) design using features of the Active Transportation Program's funding process. This design, initially introduced by @thistlethwaite1960 and fully described by @lee2010, provides local randomization around the funding threshold, allowing for causal identification of a treatment effect. 

The ATP awards funding to streetscape projects with scores above a threshold defined by the funding allocated by the California legislature. Applicants can manipulate their application packets in order to yield higher scores based on the publicly announced rubric. However, many questions are qualitative, and leave room for the discretion of the application evaluators. This discretion implies that applicants do not have precise control over their scores. In particular, they do not have precise control over their scores around the threshold, since the threshold is not known until after projects have been submitted and scored. As described by @lee2010, this imprecise control over an approximately continuous running variable (the project score) implies that the treatment is as good as randomly assigned around the cutoff. This local random assignment implies that we can identify a treatment effect using the discontinuity gap at the cutoff.

Because the treatment probability does not sharply jump from 0 to 1 at the threshold—funded projects could fail to be constructed, and denied projects could be constructed using other funds—this research design will use a "fuzzy" RD approach. As a result, the treatment effect identified will be a weighted local average treatment effect (LATE). The LATE estimates the average treatment effect for compliers (in the language of @angrist1996): those who construct the project if funded, and those who do not construct the project if not funded. The weights for this weighted LATE are the ex-ante likelihood that an applicant's score is close to the threshold (conditional on observables). The LATE estimation requires two additional assumptions: monotonicity (no defiers who would construct the project if denied funding, but would not construct if awarded funding) and excludability (crossing the score threshold can only impact the outcome via the treatment). While these assumptions cannot be proven to hold, I can provide evidence to support them, and the broader validity of the research design. 

For my econometric approach, there are several considerations I will need to make. I will consider a few regression specifications to ensure robustness, including parametric and nonparametric approaches. Either specification will employ a full set of interactions with the treatment, to ensure the regressions are separate on each side of the discontinuity. I will employ the results of @calonico2020 for guidance on optimal bandwidth selection, and will pursue robustness tests to evaluate sensitivity of the results to the chosen specification.

While covariates and baseline outcomes prior to treatment are not needed in the regression specification for identification under this research design, I hope to include them in order to soak up additional variation and yield smaller standard errors on the treatment effect, as well as explore heterogeneity in the treatment effect. In particular, the inclusion of pretrends data, and the leveraging of the panel structure of my data will be important to the precision of the final results. 

The usual standard errors for this fuzzy RD estimator are two-stage least squares heteroskedasticity-robust clustered standard errors. The level of clustering will be important to this research, as localities may submit multiple applications. In addition, the standard errors will likely need to be corrected for the fact that some projects are re-submitted in multiple rounds. However, recent econometrics research have developed more advanced tools for inference with regression discontinuities when including covariates [@calonico2019; @imbens2019], as well as analyzing the performance of fuzzy RDs for always-takers and never-takers [@bertanha2020]. I will review these approaches and consider how they might be best integrated into my estimation procedures. 
